
SECTIONS
SEARCH
SKIP TO CONTENTSKIP TO SITE INDEXSCIENCE
PLAY THE CROSSWORD

Account
SCIENCE
|
Hints of Phantom Crater Found Under Volcanic Plateau in Laos

1
TRILOBITES

Hints of Phantom Crater Found Under Volcanic Plateau in Laos
Scientists knew a meteorite impact had flung debris all over the world, but where it struck has remained a mystery.


A chunk of tektite found in Laos. Tektites are glassy, rocky debris formed by the impact of meteorites on the Earth&rsquo;s surface.
A chunk of tektite found in Laos. Tektites are glassy, rocky debris formed by the impact of meteorites on the Earth’s surface.Credit...Tom McHugh/Science Source
By Katherine Kornei
Jan. 7, 2020

1
Earth has had many run-ins with space rocks. They’ve triggered the demise of the dinosaurs 66 million years ago, lit up daytime skies over Russia in thousands of dash cam videos and even struck a human.

But one major meteorite impact that occurred roughly 800,000 years ago has long baffled researchers. They know it happened because millions of blobs of glass known as tektites were launched over 10 percent of the planet’s surface, from Southeast Asia to Antarctica and across wide swathes of the Indian and Pacific Oceans.

The impact that flung these Australasian tektites would have excavated a crater at least several miles in diameter and hundreds of feet deep. But nearly a century of sleuthing failed to turn up any direct trace of the strike.

“That’s a very difficult size hole to make go away,” said Aaron Cavosie, a planetary scientist at the Space Science and Technology Centre at Curtin University in Perth, Australia.

Now a team of researchers think they’ve found it, buried beneath a lava bed in Laos.

The team, led by Kerry Sieh, a geologist at the Earth Observatory of Singapore, published its evidence last week in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. While some researchers suggest that additional fieldwork is needed to confirm the findings, these results provide important clues toward piecing together a catastrophic encounter between Earth and a fiery visitor from space.

Dr. Sieh has been hunting for the crater for years, but many leads turned out to be dead ends. While most scientists agree the meteorite impact likely occurred in Southeast Asia, that presents a puzzle.

Many ancient impact craters have disappeared from Earth’s surface as a result of volcanic, tectonic and other erosional forces. But most places in Southeast Asia experience low rates of erosion and sedimentation, insufficient to have erased such a large crater in a relatively short amount of time.

However, there’s at least one exception: a Delaware-sized plateau near the Mekong River in southern Laos. Here, volcanic eruptions have created lava beds up to 1,000 feet deep. That’s thick enough to hide a large crater, the scientists realized. The hunt was on.

Dr. Sieh and his colleagues began by studying data showing that Australasian tektites contain elements characteristic of the Laotian volcanic field. The scientists also age dated the lava flows. Some predated the impact while others postdated it. That makes sense, said Dr. Sieh, since the lavas that buried the crater must be younger than the impact and the lavas that were incorporated into the tektites must be older.

Editors’ Picks

Podcast Groups Aren’t Just About Podcasts

Sex, Violence and Self-Discovery Collide in the Incandescent ‘Cleanness’

We’re Living in a Subscriptions World. Here’s How to Navigate It.
Dr. Sieh and his team also measured the local gravitational field around the lava beds. Craters often exhibit a slightly weaker gravitational tug than surrounding areas because they can be filled with broken-up, less densely packed material. The scientists found a gravity signal consistent with an elongated crater roughly 11 miles long by 8 miles wide filled with about 300 feet of jumbled rock.


ImageA photomicrograph of quartz crystal from an impact-breccia deposit about 12 miles southeast of the center of where researchers think a Laotian crater is located.
A photomicrograph of quartz crystal from an impact-breccia deposit about 12 miles southeast of the center of where researchers think a Laotian crater is located.Credit...Dayana Schonwalder Angel
The team then set off looking for debris — any large impact would have scattered boulders and soil. A few miles from the summit of the volcanic field, Dr. Sieh and his colleagues stumbled upon two places where the hill slope had been excavated to make room for a road. Those cuts revealed sandstone boulders that fit together, “like a jigsaw puzzle,” said Dr. Sieh.

“We calculated that they were ejected from the crater and landed at about 450 meters per second, fast enough to shatter them upon impact,” said Vanpheng Sihavong, a geoscientist at the Ministry of Energy and Mines in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and a member of the research team.

The scientists also examined quartz grains in some of the boulders and observed that they were fractured, often considered a smoking gun of an impact.

“We think we’ve found that,” Dr. Sieh said.

While these results are consistent with a buried crater, they are not unambiguous proof, said Dr. Cavosie.

“It’s a great lead on a new site worthy of investigation,” he said, but added that the next step would be to drill through the lava.

“Finding shock-deformed rocks would seal the deal.”

Meteorites and Craters
Ice Age Asteroid Crater Discovered Beneath Greenland Glacier Nov. 14, 2018

What Happened to Earth’s Ancient Craters? Scientists Seek Clues on the Moon’s Pocked SurfaceJan. 17, 2019

Drilling Into the Chicxulub Crater, Ground Zero of the Dinosaur ExtinctionNov. 17, 2016

New ‘Extinct’ Meteorite Hints at Violent Cosmic CollisionJune 16, 2016

How Asteroids May Have Brought Water to EarthMay 15, 2018

A version of this article appears in print on Jan. 14, 2020, Section D, Page 2 of the New York edition with the headline: An Awol Crater: To Find Hole Meteor Left Behind, Scientists Just Kept Digging. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe
READ 1 COMMENT

Trilobites
Unearthing fascinating morsels of science.
Sting, at about six weeks old, was one of three wolf pups that fetched a ball during an experiment at the University of Stockholm.
What Wolf Pups That Play Fetch Reveal About Your Dog
6h ago
Fragments of tools used by Neanderthals recovered from the sea.
Neanderthals Could Swim. They Even Dived.
Jan. 15
A Ginkgo tree growing in Guizhou Province, China, that is more than 1,000 years old.
The Secret That Helps Some Trees Live More Than 1,000 Years
Jan. 13
More in Science
An illustration of a meteor hurtling toward Earth during the late Cretaceous period.
Mark Garlick/Science Source
Meteorite or Volcano? New Clues to the Dinosaurs’ Demise
3h ago
A scanning electron microscopy image of Prometheoarchaeum syntrophicum, a microbe scientists found at the bottom of the ocean. It is closely linked to more complex life. 
Hiroyuki Imachi, Masaru K. Nobu and JAMSTEC
This Strange Microbe May Mark One of Life’s Great Leaps
Jan. 15
An arch made from living building materials in Dr. Srubar’s lab.
CU Boulder College of Engineering & Applied Science
Bricks Alive! Scientists Create Living Concrete
Jan. 15
A fire burned in Bargo, Australia, about 90 miles southwest of Sydney in December.
Peter Parks/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
Air Pollution, Evolution, and the Fate of Billions of Humans
Jan. 13
The astronomer Vera Rubin at the Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Ariz., in 1965.
via Carnegie Institution of Washington
Vera Rubin Gets a Telescope of Her Own
Jan. 11
African grey parrots, famed for their intelligence, helped each other obtain treats in an experiment, even at a cost to one of the parrots.
Juniors Bildarchiv/GmbH, via Alamy
Parrots Show Off Selfless Behavior
Jan. 9
Editors’ Picks
Chewy tahini blondies from Adeena Sussman’s “Sababa” (2019).
Copyright © 2019 by Adeena Sussman. Photo © Dan Perez.
The Cookbooks You Need for 2020, as Selected by Chefs
Jan. 13

Heather Sten for The New York Times
Olivia Palermo Got a Lot Out of That Internship
Jan. 14
Andy Warhol, “Self-Portrait” from around 1980. An exhibition at Jack Shainman gallery includes nine Polaroid self-portraits of this icon of pop inscrutability.
The Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts, Inc./Licensed by Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York
Take a Look at These Rarely Seen Andy Warhol Photos
Jan. 14
Most Popular
A Bronx Renter Considers Upgrades in Manhattan and Queens. Which Borough Did She Choose?
Opinion: Winners and Losers of the Democratic Debate
A Maine Paper Mill’s Unexpected Savior: China
The Second-Biggest Diamond in History Has a New Owner
The Sex Scene Evolves for the #MeToo Era
Who Won the Debate? Experts Weigh In
Robert Hyde, Erratic Ex-Landscaper, Is Unlikely New Impeachment Figure
Can ‘Star Trek’ Chart a Way Forward?
Lev Parnas, Key Player in Ukraine Affair, Completes Break With Trump and Giuliani
6 Takeaways From the January 2020 Democratic Debate
Site Index
Go to Home Page »
NEWS
Home Page
World
U.S.
Politics
Election 2020
New York
Business
Tech
Science
Sports
Obituaries
Today's Paper
Corrections
OPINION
Today's Opinion
Op-Ed Columnists
Editorials
Op-Ed Contributors
Letters
Sunday Review
Video: Opinion
ARTS
Today's Arts
Art & Design
Books
Dance
Movies
Music
Pop Culture
Television
Theater
Video: Arts
LIVING
Automobiles
Crossword
Education
Food
Health
Jobs
Magazine
Parenting
Real Estate
Style
T Magazine
Travel
Love
MORE
Reader Center
Wirecutter
Live Events
The Learning Network
Tools & Services
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Multimedia
Photography
Video
Newsletters
NYT Store
Times Journeys
Manage My Account
SUBSCRIBE
Home Delivery
Gift Subscriptions
Crossword
Cooking
Email Newsletters
Corporate Subscriptions
Education Rate
Mobile Applications
Replica Edition
Español
中文网
Site Information Navigation
© 2020 The New York Times Company
NYTCoContact UsWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptions